07:28
Chair
    Brief introductions first. It's half past seven or a bit later. We're here until nine o'clock, so if we get through
    as many questions as possible. If it goes on a bit and it's still exciting then I'm sure you'd like to stay a bit
    longer, otherwise people'd quite like to get to the pub.

    I'll introduce the candidates first. I have quite a lot a lot of written questions that have been submitted and also
    I'll also take questions from the floor.

    Let's start from the far end. We've got Marcus Rock who's standing for the Green Party. He's a chartered chemical
    engineer working for a metals refinement company in Wellingborough. Marcus has lived in Northampton with his family
    since 1999.

    Next we have Barry Mahoney. He's standing for the UK Independence Party. Barry has lived in Stoke Bruerne for the
    last seventeen years. he's a chartered accountant and has worked in commerce and the public sector.

    Next we have Matthew May, who is standing for the Labour Party. He's an assistant head teacher, history teacher and
    a father of a five year-old.

    Andrea Leadsom is standing for the Conservative Party, married with three children and lives in the centre of the
    constituency. Andrea has a very successful career in banking and finance followed by founding a charity for early
    years development and Uganda-UK schools linking project.

    Next we have Tony Tappy who is standing for the English Democrats. Tony is married with children. He runs his own
    business in company turn-around and business improvements in both the UK and Europe. He is a qualified engineer with
    business degrees.

    And finally we have Scott Collins, who is standing for the Liberal Democrats. He's got two children and a partner,
    Jane. He's a sales administrator for a business energy supplier in Northampton. He grew up and lived much of his
    life in South Northamptonshire.

    And I am totally non-political. I'm the chairman of Chipping Warden and Edgcote Parish Council. I was sort of
    volunteered for this job. I've never voted for any of these people before, and like yourself I'll make my mind up
    after today.

09:43
Chair
    Right. The best way to do this, I think, if we take a question from the paper and then a question from the floor and
    we'll go from there. Do we have Wing Commander Goodall in the room?

09:57
Wing Commander Goodall
    Yes

09:58
Chair
    You've submitted a couple of questions, Wing Commander, but they're more statements than questions. Do you have an
    actual question you'd like to ask?

10:06
Wing Commander Goodall
    Yes, I do. I'm sure we're all aware of all the unfortunate people being brought back from Afghanistan who've been
    killed and wounded, and we hear out Prime Minister talking about NATO forces in Afghanistan. Can you please tell me
    how many the French, the Germans, the Italians, the Spanish, and the other NATO countries have got in Afghanistan
    compared with this country, and how many of their military personnel have been killed and injured?

10:42
Matthew May (Labour)
    Well, not many, and I'm incredibly angry about that. My personal stance on this I'll put on the table right away.
    I believe that our heroes, our boys and ladies out there, are doing a fabulous job in difficult conditions, and
    their doing a job to keep us safe; I genuinely believe that. I remember as a teacher hearing at my school of the
    terrible events in July 2005, and I remember very clearly seeing panic and fear on the faces of young children. I
    believe very strongly that our troups over in Afghanistan to stop any sort of attack like that again.

    I'm also incredibly angry about the fact that we seem to be doing this alone with the Americans. I think that we
    need to be very strong in ensuring that it's not just us; that there are other people stepping up as we have have
    done consistently through our history, and ensuring that this is genuinely a United Nations, a NATO effort, and it's
    not just down to us.

11:56
Andrea Leadsom (Conservative)
    I think that over the last ten years we've had a completely non-policy towards our military interventions overseas,
    and I think that the real problem we have now is that the soldiers, many of whom claim that they are doing good work
    in Afghanistan, are not being supported by their own political leaders. I think that that's utterly appalling and
    unforgivable.

    I think that if you send troups to battle you have to be absolutely clear, not just within the government, but also
    with the public and with the soldiers themselves, what you're trying to acheive; how you'll know when you get there;
    what are the milestones along the way. And you also need to properly equip and look after the families of those
    soldiers, and I think on both of those fronts that a Conservative government would be committed to creating a proper
    war footing. Our defence minister would be a senior member of the Cabinet, not the twenty-second out of twenty-five.
    And there would be huge efforts made to be clear about what we're trying to do in Afghanistan, and I think that the
    biggest frustration of all for our serving soldiers, as they've said time and time again, is that they try to do a
    job, and obstacles are being put in their way as regards kit and as regards good communication about what they're
    trying to do. So, supporting our soldiers in whatever their mission is to look after this country is key.

13:25
Barry Mahoney (United Kingdom Independence Party)
    I can answer in two words; "exit strategy". When this country went to Afghanistan to start the false Afghan wars a
    hundred and forty years, a hundred and eighty years, and none of those wars were really even successful. And there
    was never ever put, when we were there, what are the objectives to be acheived, when will we know that they're done,
    and therefore when can we come out.

    Rather than, far from, winning the war what it is doing is inflaming the extremists in the Middle East to kick off a
    full-scale Jihad or holy war there. There is one thing that is almost universal and that is the worst thing you can
    have in your country is a foreign army of occupation. Ask anyone on the continent of Europe who were an occupied
    country, and that is how many people in the Middle East will see any army that's just purely a foreign army of
    occupation. And once they start banging and crashing about, apparently without control as they then did in Iraq, a
    war justified on the lie of non-existent weapons of mass destruction. Sorry, I drifted off of Afghanistan, but they
    are related.

    And that is what we need to do; bring the troops back, and not in body bags.

15:10
Tony Tappy (English Democrats)
    Before I actually reply, I'd like to say that I'm ex-forces myself and have experienced a lack of support in certain
    areas. I don't --, I have to say I don't agree with this war and am inclined to bring our people back; it's not
    acheiving what the propaganda says it should. It's said that the Germans are constitutionally obliged not to be in
    the same sort of fighting that our troops are in.

    Most of the NATO countries that you've mentioned didn't really want to be there, so that --. We've followed the
    Americans in what that they seem to do, as opposed to our NATO and European Parliament. It hasn't been supported
    properly be the current Government and the equipment is poor to say the least, and I speak with quite a lot of
    recent knowledge of that. Most of the equipment they originally took out - for example, some of the lorries were
    actually dating back thirty, thirty-five years; they weren't fit for purpose. The tanks, when they were desertising
    them, getting them ready, were literally breaking down before they left the country; it was appalling, so we can't
    say that we supported our troops.

16:43
Marcus Rock (Green Party)
    To answer the question, there are about a hundred-and-twenty thousand NATO forces in Afghanistan, a hundred thousand
    of whom are American. That leaves twenty thousand. Ten thousand of those are British, the remaining ten thousand
    approximately made up, primarily Canadian, and then European forces and then some Australian.

    So the answer, really, is there's only a handful of the other European and NATO forces have actually given [...].
    And most, as we've discussed, they're not really keen on participating, so it doesn't really matter, as far as the
    British are concerned; it doesn't matter how good a job we're doing there, we only represent ten percent, less than
    ten percent, of the total NATO force. So, we're reliant, in a way, on the Americans doing a good job, which we don't
    think they're doing, as their own forces are split [on] two separate operations. I think the whole strategy is
    complete nonsense.

    Green Party policy is to pull out of Afghanistan. We would do better for them as a country, and also pull out of
    NATO as as we can see NATO is not working, because none of our other European partners are contributing.

17:59
Scott Collins (Liberal Democrats)
    Okay, back to the question itself, about what they're doing and are they doing enough. Quite frankly, there's not
    enough people there, certainly not enough of our so-called partners there. And as usual, we've become the policemen
    of the world, us and the Americans carrying the can for just about everybody else. You hear the stories and you see
    the items, you know; "not allowed to fight at night"; "not allowed to go near anywhere where there's guns going
    off"; it's a bit weird hearing that being said of a war zone, where you can't go where near where there's live
    battles going on and all the rest of it.

    They are trying to sack the soldiers just the same as our armies are[sic]. Quite frankly, nobody else apart from the
    Americans and ourselves and the countries Marcus mentioned a moment ago are doing anywhere near enough. One of the
    great things that happened when we were dealing with the issues we had in central, well West, East, in Europe with
    the break-up of Yugoslavia and the rest of it, one of the great things that happened there was that people started
    doing more, but they still weren't doing enough, but at least we were still able to rotate our troops and we had a
    constant sort of presence, that wasn't overbearing and wasn't massively carrying the can for the rest of the world.
    And you know, that was without the Americans, the Americans were very tardy in coming in.

    The main issue in going into Afghanistan; I think it was deserved at the time. We've sent our troops there to
    actually drive out the Taliban and install a democratic government. Now I think, my personal view is, we should then
    have left the minute Karzai decided democracy didn't suit him. When he rigged that election last year we should have
    been out of there like a shot, because quite frankly, we can't trust the one person who said he'd install a
    democratic government and didn't. And now we've got him in the last couple of weeks, threatening to actually join
    forces with the Taliban to fight against us and push us out of his own country. That is just, quite simply, not
    acceptable. Why are we defending some of these people? It's just ridiculous.

19:58
Chair
    Wing Commander, have you got anything you'd like to add?

20:02
Wing Commander Goodall
    Yes, if I might. It would seem that all of you are saying that the Labour Party is totally bloody incompetent in
    their management of the war in Afghanistan. [applause]

    And I wholely agree with every aspect of that. A few years ago I used to command the Wellcome Squadron [sp?]. That
    squadron today is flying Chinook helicopters in Afghanistan, and I went down recently to see them and meet them and
    talk to them. They're on constant ground fire when they're flying and when this gentleman talks about, you know,
    we've only just been in there for a few years, in 1920 the squadron I used to command went into Afghanistan and they
    were there virtually from 1920 to about 1925, fighting in Afghanistan. And if you look at your history, the first
    Afghan war was in 1839, so Labour Party, for God's sake get your hat off.

21:06
Chair
    Do we have Jeffrey Baker-Rule in the room? Would you like me to read your question, or you happy to ask it?

21:10
Jeffrey Baker-Rule
    I'm quite happy to ask it. Ladies and gentlemen, --

21:15
Chair
    Before you start, excuse me. It's getting very warm up here. I don't know if the gentlemen would like to remove
    their jackets at all.

21:22
Scott Collins (Liberal Democrat)
    I don't have room! [laughter]

    If I disappear and they don't notice, can you shout?

21:35
Jeffrey Baker-Rule
    Ladies and gentlemen, Jack Payton brought Evenley much closer to home. I think we could debate the actual
    politics all night and not really acheive anything, but here actually [inaudible] of our local candidate, in my
    view.

    I'd like to preface my question by saying that I'm actually a supporter of railways. I think we need to get more
    cars off the road, not withstanding that I'm in the motor industry, so I'm being rather selfless about this.

    We've seen the plan to put this super-duper line from London through Birmingham, and there's lots of emotive words
    like "tearing up acres of beautiful countryside", which may well be the case, but actually the Victorians did that
    many years ago and perhaps we should have kept up with their good work, because we need more railways.

    Not withstanding that, some years ago, in fact, quite recently, there were several plans put forward by Central Rail
    Group to have a railway along much this line. They were defeating and pushed through Parliament and kicked out. And
    now the Government, it seems to me anyway, perhaps I'm not altogether up to speed on this, but it seems to me that
    the Government has now reinvented the idea as their own and planned to have this high-speed rail link with
    absolutely no stations en route, taking people from London to Birmingham and back again. And we're going to get all
    the downsides of the years of misery and the worries about our property and then ultimately the noise of two-hundred
    miles-per-hour trains with none of the advantages. Now okay, it's a fast line and there's no point stopping at every
    station but it strikes me that it's a mighty long way from London to Birmingham, we're about half-way, the A43 is
    the wonderful link between two motorways.

    Which of you would support the railway -- do you all support the railway? And secondly, would you support a stop for
    us here in Brackley so that we get some of the advantages and provide a stopping off point for people that live in
    surrounding areas? Thank you.

23:25
Chair
    Right, we'll take these in a different order. Barry?

23:29
Barry Mahoney (United Kingdom Independence Party)
    Okay, well, the UK Independence Party policy is to support railways, partly, because of cause, that would relieve
    congestion on the roads, and road transport normally requires three times as much land use, so environmentally it's
    a good bet, and we intend to spend part of the six billion saved on withdrawal from the European Union, because
    there's a massive cost there, on investment in railways. So yes, both the idea of railways is to have a network of
    railways, not one going at two hundred and fifty miles an hour, but a number of them doing the normal train speeds,
    fifty, sixty, seventy miles per hour. And what shocked me about this plan, partly, is was it seems to be a line in
    isolation, it's not part of a network, it's part of a network envisioned with a line through Bristol through
    Birmingham up to a new East Coast line, and the other one was a rather sort of high-handed way people have been
    given three months notice to cough up or go, and that seems to be very abrupt, the so-called consultation process
    before compulsory purchase. The existing line won't be at capacity until 2025, so there is a bit of time left to
    review this.

25:05
Tony Tappy (English Democrats)
    I was actually on the committee that's been blighted by the great Central that you mentioned, and we were successful
    in defeating it. I am very --, I totally disagree with this lot, I totally disagree with the disruption it would
    cause; I don't see any advantage for this area, when we have a perfectly adequate line that can be improved from
    Euston to Birmigham anyway, with stations along the way. By people wanting spurs from that to take in smaller trains
    and then come back to the main line I don't have a problem with that. But to destroy this amount of countryside for
    no purpose doesn't make any sense to me.

    The other thing about High Speed, I often travel on the Virgin Pendolino trains from London back to the Midlands,
    and when I travel late at night instead of taking thirty-five minutes, it takes fifty-five minutes, or an hour. And
    the reason it slows down is because of noise pollution. So, it doesn't seem very fast to me when it's approaching
    midnight and I want to go home and I'm sitting on a train for half an hour longer than the journey normally takes. I
    can't see the point of this line; I think the money can be better spent on improving the existing line from London
    to Birmingham.

26:27
Marcus Rock (Green Party)
    Yeah, this is a tricky one, isn't it? Because there are, on the face of it, no real benefits to the local community
    here. I don't know, although they've indicated where the route will go, it will take many years exactly where it
    will go, I think. The main driver obviously, is to reduce aviation transport within the United Kingdom, so we should
    make efforts to reduce air travel, say, London to Scotland. On the other hand, putting that railway through this
    area doesn't benefit this area.

27:06
Tony Tappy (English Democrats) (interjecting)
    Well, it's London to Birmingham, I mean --

27:10
Marcus Rock (Green Party)
    Exactly, yeah. The other thing is, the cost of it is enormous; it's twenty billion. And the Green Party priority,
    really, is to spend half that amount upgrading existing transport; that'll be the priority.

27:31
Chair
    Scott?

27:32
Scott Collins (Liberal Democrats)
    Yep, certainly; still here. I agree with the gentleman that asked the question. I too support railways, wholely. But
    I have to say that as far as HS2 goes from what I've seen, from the control document, from other items that have
    been in the press and elsewhere, to my mind, the financial case for this particular stretch hasn't been made; it
    just isn't there.

    The figures that have been published is over the course of thirty years it'll make sixty-eight billion pounds worth
    of profit. No; it'll add sixty-eight billion pounds worth to the national economy, in benefit. That may all well be
    true, but the figures that have actually been published to back that up the sensible part, the money-making end is
    actually Birmingham-North, not London to Birmingham, as has been pointed out already. There are already valid lines
    that can be improved on the London to Birmingham line as it is; we don't need another high speed one. Make one of
    the one's we've got already; add another track to that; widen it slightly if you have to. The tearing up of the
    countryside, driving through Edgcote and other places like that, through the middle of a historic battlefield. I
    mean, not just the edge, right through the centre. It's absolutely crazy, it just doesn't add up. The financial case
    just isn't there.

    I was in Kent only last week and I did meet with some people who were actually involved in campaigning against HS1.
    And one of the advantages that they said that we have, which may not feel like it now, is that when they had HS1
    announced, they had five or seven lines announced all at the same time as possibilities. And consultation and
    campaigning against it was therefore spread over the seven lines and therefore the government had effectively said
    that the results that came out were so small they weren't representative. At least we've got one line to campaign
    against and I'll certainly be campaigning against the current route. My party has already said it agrees with the
    high-speed rail, and I think that's great; I agree with it too. But not this piece of the line, it's not the
    sensible end to start.  They want to do it in two stages. As far as I'm concerned if you can only do it in two
    stages do Birmingham-Manchester first; when it's made a profit you can pay for the other half. It doesn't make any
    sense to start with where they are. It's this obsession with London again, unfortunately. But it doesn't make any
    sense to start at the London end of things; it's not the profit-making end. If you were a business you've do the bit
    that'd make a profit first, and not [inaudible], and we seem to be doing it the wrong way round.

29:55
Chair
    Matthew?

29:56
Matthew May (Labour)
    Well, you prefaced your question with saying local issues and local candidates, and I'm not an apologista for the
    Labour Party on everything, and I don't want to be. I'm very conscious that if elected here I'd be your MP,
    whichever political persuasion the constituents.

    I am not convinced in any way that the money that's being spent in a recession on this scheme, the forty minutes
    gained between London and Birmingham, is justifiable at all. I'm not convinced about any sort of surveys that have
    been done on the possibility of upgrading current lines. I am not convinced about any local benefit, as you quite
    rightly say; that can only be temporary in terms of building the thing through Brackley, nothing after that. And
    consequently I've written to the transport secretary saying two things: "Why was this announcement done at the time
    that it's been done, just before a general election?", and "Why was the consultation period so short?".

    As yet I have not had a reply, but I will assure you that should I be elected I'm not going to tow the party line on
    this issue, because I think it's too important for the people of this area and the area that I hope to represent.

31:06
Chair
    Andrea.

31:07
Andrea Leadsom (Conservative)
    Yeah. High speed rail is a Conservative Party policy, but not anything along the lines of what the Labour government
    have proposed. Conservative policy is to create a national network, in the initial stages joining Heathrow, London,
    Leeds, Manchester and Birmingham, and then ultimately to Scotland and Wales.

    Now, I believe we're a very long way off any sort of strong, firm financial justification for high-speed rail.
    Again, at a time when our economy is literally on its knees, I suspect that this is going to get overtaken by events
    and we'll find that it is simply unaffordable for the foreseeable future.

    But I think that the second point to make is that this route simply doesn't make sense, and I think that the
    proposal coming out from Labour was all about politics; it was all about trying to punish and cause disruption in
    twelve Conservative constituencies three weeks ahead of a General Election, in the certain knowledge that because
    the Conservative Party is in favour of high-speed rail it would be unable to rule out this route without having seen
    all of the workings and that's where we are right now; the Conservative Party doesn't rule out this route, but it
    also doesn't, by any means, rule it in.

    My own feeling is that it would be much better to have a high-speed train route going up an existing travel corridor
    and with the potential to have an interim stop-off.  Now the argument is that if you have a two-hundred-and-fifty
    mile-per-hour train it takes ten minutes to stop it and start it again, so that you can't have interim routes, but
    the way I see it if we absolutely have to have high-speed rail coming through some of the most beautiful, untouched
    areas of England, then there needs something in it for people here, and there is no doubt that an awful lot talked
    about that, er, "let's just upgrade the existing lines"; there isn't the capacity, and with the upgrade to the West
    Coast Mainline at vast expense and huge inconvenience to travellers for very little gain; that just isn't a
    realistic option.

    So, to summarise, high speed rail is a good idea that has been carefully thought through, and all the parties are in
    favour of it as a way to the future. It's not really costed, and in my opinion in this current state of our economy
    it's not going to happen for a very long time. Thirdly, the environmental case has simply not been made and I don't
    think the Conservative Party will be held to the findings of the Labour government, and they will be looking at all
    the alternatives, and I personally do not think that this route is viable, doing the damage that it does, unless
    there is significant compensation to those affected along the route.

33:54
Chair
    Thank you. [inaudible]

33:56
Jeffrey Baker-Rule [probably]
    Yeah, I agree. I'd rather not have it at all. What I'm saying is that if we have to have it, let's fight for a
    station so we get some benefit, otherwise it's all lose-lose.

34:06
Chair
    [inaudible]. If anybody's interested in anything about the High Speed line, if you get your children or whoever else
    onto Facebook and look at the South Northants Action Group, you'll find so much information there you'll be amazed.

34:22
Chair
    Right, do we have councellor Ron Sorbridge?

34:25
Ron Sorbridge
    Yes. I want to ask a question about education. Do you agree that education, or improved education, could be the key
    to the future success of this country? If you do agree with that statement, what radical changes would you make in
    the education system to bring about that improvement?

34:46
Chair
    Okay. I think we'll start with Scott.

34:48
Scott Collins (Liberal Democrat)
    Yep. I completely agree. We were only saying, at hustings similar to this last night, that knowledge and ideas is
    something this country is absolutely outstanding at. You know, we do have fantastically well-educated children, but
    they're not given the right way of actually going through schools. Education should be better than it is. They're
    already there. We have, you know, some of the thoughts that come out of some of the children I meet are incredible
    quite frankly; things I weren't thinking twenty, thirty years ago.

    But as far as improving education, I think we need to highlight those that are at the bottom end of education, and
    I'm sure that Matthew will follow this up himself, that they are the ones that need the most support, and from what
    I've seen at many, many schools, schools are so strapped for cash that those children tend to lose out. They get
    better support than they perhaps otherwise had twenty, thirty years ago, but they still don't get enough support;
    they need help with more, and we've already said that people premium [?] about highlighting those children that are
    in particular desparate need of extra help and making sure that they have the money to see them through that extra
    education to make sure that schools actually have that going in all those children, because too often money goes
    into schools and gets hogged off into various other budgets and before you know where you are it's all gone. So,
    that's what we would certainly do.

    It's a trite thing to say, you know, "children are our future", because everybody says it, but it's absolutely true,
    and unless we value them and value their education then we'll be in a much poorer state in years to come. I think
    we're already seeing some of the outcomes of poor educational attainment already, so we have to do, and that's a
    desparately important thing to do very, very soon.

36:40
Chair
    Marcus?

36:41
Marcus Rock (Green Party)
    Yes, okay. I remember when I was at primary school age I was talking about going to university with my mum and
    saying, "yeah, I'm going to university", because we happened to be in a bus passing Bristol University at the time,
    and she said, "yes, there'll be no financial reason why you shouldn't go to university", because for her (she was
    born during the war), although she was capable, they couldn't afford to send her to university. So I was the first
    person in our family to be able to go to university.

    Since the Labour government has come into power, they've scrapped free tuition fees, so now, you were talking about
    radical changes, for me it's [...], the Green Party policy of reinstating free tuition fees for students is now a
    radical one, because none of the others is talking about it. And, maintanence grants for students; I think it's
    outrageous that we expect students to be coming out of university with huge debt. We talk about debt being crippling
    families, but students are coming out with big levels of debt and they're unable to pay that off after many years of
    employment. So, that's one key issue where we would restore the free tuition fees and the maintanence grant. I'll
    keep it brief, [inaudible]

38:04
Chair
    Tony.

38:07
Tony Tappy (English Democrats)
    It was always my understanding the Labour Party was there to support the population and improve people's, working
    people's, advantages. Since we've brought in, the Labour Party's brought in, the tuition fees that have been
    mentioned it's further disadvantaged people. The wealthy can afford to subsidise the children and the fees, and the
    less wealthy cannot. So, we've created, or further advanced, an us-and-them situation.

    I have a son currently studying in Denmark in university and [inaudible] and when he looks round here to do a
    masters it's thirty thousand pounds, roughly; couldn't afford it; I didn't want to afford it, and he found he had no
    tuition fees, no expenses in that way and government assistance if he went to Denmark. So they're looking after the
    youth in a way that we perhaps should take note of.

    My children are a bit too old to talk about primary and junior with any current knowledge, however, my children all
    started school in Belfast and the education was excellent. It's been slightly [inaudible] at the moment, where
    they want to reduce and take away the grammar, though that's probably an argument in itself. However none of my
    children are geniuses; yes they all went to university; they got their degrees. When they came to Warwickshire when
    we first moved to the Midlands, they were roughly eighteen months ahead in all cases, in virtually every subject, so
    there has to be a reason for that, and one of the ones that stands out in my mind is that, not talking about
    corporal punishment, but there was 'polite discipline' in the schools in Northern Ireland, and respect, and I don't
    see that in many of the schools in the UK.

40:13
Matthew May (Labour)
    Thank you for your question, sir. Education means a lot to me, as it clearly does to you. Briefly, I want to talk
    about Labour's record on education; I think it's a stunning one. I became a teacher in 1996, and the transformation
    that I've seen has been amazing. I remember teaching in a school in Northampton; underfunded, badly run, not enough
    books for the students, churning out failure. I then moved on to a school in Milton Keynes were the A-C rate was
    nine percent, and that's child abuse, really; nine percent of the school leaving with five GCSEs, and I've worked
    [inaudible] to turn that around, and last year, I'm proud to say that we were at eighty-five percent A-C.

    The funding's gone up from 2006 
